Task 1: Surface Water Quality Standards (SWQS)
a. Analyze logger data to determine if select monitoring reaches are impaired for sensitive aquatic
life (e.g., macroinvertebrates, trout) in freshwater streams. Analyze daily/monthly data at each
monitoring location against state SWQS criteria. Which sites are meeting/not meeting SWQS (do
temperatures and dissolved oxygen meet criteria required to support aquatic life and trout?)?
b. How often do sites exceed SWQS for temperature (how many days per year)?
c. How often do sites exceed SWQS for dissolved oxygen (how many days per year)?


Task 2: Site specific water quality conditions important to us other than SWQS
a. Determine which sites are more supportive of migrating species during key lifecycle periods over
time (spring adult migration, spring spawning, summer fry stage, fall fry migration)?
i. What is the daily min, max, mean temperature and dissolved oxygen?
b. Determine which sites are more likely not to thermally stress sensitive species during peak
summer temperatures?
i. For the period of July 1- Sept 15
1. What’s the daily max?
c. What is the daily mean, min, and max temperatures?
d. What is the monthly mean temperature?
e. What is the annual mean temperature?
f. Are there significant changes to daily, monthly and annual mean temperature and dissolved
oxygen over time (year to year, across all years sampled)?
g. How can we characterize seasonal variation over time and what differences, or patterns do we
see in seasonal variation across the years?


Task 3: Project Specific Analyses
a. What are water quality conditions upstream/downstream/within project area(s) pre and post dam
removal (assessing turbidity, conductivity, dissolved oxygen and temperature)?
b. What are baseline water quality conditions upstream/downstream/within floodplain reforestation
corridor(s) before and after tree plantings (assessing temperature, dissolved oxygen)?
c. What are baseline water quality conditions downstream Hyper Humus (assessing temperature,
dissolved oxygen)?


Task 4: Species specific analyses
Updated 11.09.2021 Page 8 of 9
a. Visualize and perform statistical analysis of macroinvertebrate and EPA Habitat Assessment
scores, including assessing spatial patterns and temporal trends. Where do sites fall on the
optimum/excellent to poor spectrum? How are scores changing over time at the level of the
individual site and within the broader network as a whole?
b. How are the individual component metrics contributing to the resulting macroinvertebrate and
EPA Habitat Assessment scores at the sites? For example, are all “Poor” sites classified as such for
the same reason or are there a range of contributing factors?

Task 5: Create a reproducible data management and analysis pipeline
a. Produce a set of recommendations for building a Reproducible Analytical Pipeline (RAP) for the
river monitoring data, including data archiving, importing, quality checking, formatting,
documenting with metadata, analyzing, and producing appropriate visualizations.
b. Implement the RAP in the form of a user-friendly tutorial document that will guide the user
through the process of re-running each analysis and reproducing each figure. The guide shall read
like a series of step-by-step instructions, with explanatory text alternating with clearly labeled
‘chunks’ of code to allow users to import data, perform analyses, and create plots. The document
shall be created using RMarkdown (https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com) within the free RStudio
software. The code shall be run directly (interactively) within RStudio and/or exported as PDF,
Word, or HTML for easy viewing.
c. A primary goal shall be to 1) make the guide readily useable even by those unfamiliar with coding
or statistical software; and 2) design and write the document with future analysis/visualization
needs of the user in mind.
Products and Deliverables: The Contractor shall deliver the following Products:

Product 1:
• Data visualization (figures, maps, plots) of seasonal, monthly, and diel fluctuations in flow,
physiochemical conditions to address the items in Task 1 with respect to state water quality
criteria.
• Meetings as needed to refine objectives and desired outputs.
• Summary statistics and statistical analysis of same along with associated interpretative text.

Product 2:
• Evaluate the water quality characteristics highlighted in Task 2 with respect to the needs of key
migratory species.
• Meetings as needed to refine objectives and desired outputs.
• Data visualization (figures, maps, plots) and statistical analysis to compare same across sites and
assess trends through time, along with associated interpretative text.

Product 3:
• Evaluate project specific questions via statistical analysis and data visualization (figures, maps,
plots).
• Meetings as needed to refine objectives and desired outputs.
• Assess spatial and temporal changes in water quality metrics with respect to dam removal
(before/after, upstream/downstream), restoration projects, and other sites of interest (Hyper
Humus). Provide associated interpretative text.

Product 4:
• Data visualization of habitat assessment and macroinvertebrate scores over time to address the
items in Task 4 with respect to individual sites and the broader watershed wide monitoring
network.
• Meetings as needed to refine objectives and desired outputs.
• Summary statistics and statistical analysis of same, along with associated interpretative text.

Product 5:
• Curated final data and code files.
• RAP workflow tutorial document in RMarkdown, PDF, Word, and HTML formats.
• README document to guide user through analysis.
• Meetings as needed to refine objectives and desired outputs.


Due Dates: The Contractor shall complete the following task and products per the due dates listed below:


Task and Product 1 Due: February 10, 2022
Task and Product 2 Due: March 10, 2022
Task and Product 3 Due: April 10, 2022
Task and Product 4 Due: April 25, 2022
Task and Product 5 Due: May 25, 2022